There are, unfurtunately, multiple ways to install and run this program. The
following are givin in order of recommendation. 

In general, we follow normal setuptools installation, but we do rely on some
packages unavailable via pip but often provided by your OS distributor.

Installing from package
    run:
        python3 -m venv --system-site-packages env
        source env/bin/activate
        pip install mailnex-0.0.tar.gz
    You'll additionally want python-xapian and python-gpgme from your system
    package manager to enable those features
    (e.g. apt-get install python-xapian python-gpgme)

    Then, you can run directly: mailnex


Installing from source

    Method 1:
        run:
            python3 -m venv --system-site-packages env
            source env/bin/activate
            python3 -m pip install .

        Install python-xapian using your system package manager (e.g. apt-get install python-xapian)
        If you want it to remember passwords, install appropriate keyring managers (TODO: name the packages)

        run directly: env/bin/mailnex

    Method 2: (for when the above method results in problems with function calls)
        run:
            python3 -m venv env
            source env/bin/activate
            python3 -m pip install .

        To enable indexed searching features, follow instructions at
        https://gist.github.com/josezambrana/920909. We use version 1.2.23 instead
        of 1.2.18. We didn't bother installing the haystack packages
        (django-haystack, xapian-haystack)

        If you want it to remember passwords, good luck. Probably your best bet is
        to do 'pip install keyring.alt' and configure plain-text password storage.

        run directly: env/bin/mailnex


Running without installation

    e.g. when doing development:

    Setup a virtualenv as above, then run:

        python3 -m pip install -e .

    That adds a mailnex script to the virtualenv or system path that calls the
    code in the project directory and installs all dependencies. Then you can
    simply run it directly:

        mailnex

System installation

    This is not recommended, because it ignores your system package manager

        python3 -m pip install .

    Then, run directly:

        mailnex
